.\" SPDX-License-Identifier: MIT
.\" Copyright (c) 2025 Jamie Adams
.TH UMRS-STAT 1 "2026-04-15" "umrs-stat 0.1.0" "UMRS Tools"
.SH NAME
umrs-stat \- display security attributes of a file as an interactive audit card
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B umrs-stat
.RI [ OPTIONS ]
.I PATH
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B umrs-stat
reads security-relevant attributes of a file and presents them as a
three-tab interactive audit card in the terminal.
.PP
The card displays:
.PP
.IP "Identity tab" 12
File path, name, type, MIME type, and size.
.IP "Security tab" 12
Security marking (SELinux context and CUI classification label),
encryption status (fscrypt, eCryptfs, LUKS-backed), and IMA/EVM
measurement and verification status.
.IP "Observations tab" 12
Enumerated security observations (setuid/setgid bits, world-writable
permissions, symlink exposure) with a count and severity summary.
.PP
All attributes are read via the
.B umrs-platform
provenance-verified abstraction layer.
No direct
.BR stat (2)
or
.BR open (2)
calls on security-relevant paths occur outside of vetted library code.
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.I PATH
Path to the file whose security attributes will be inspected.
Required.
.TP
.B \-\-json
Emit machine-readable JSON output instead of the interactive TUI.
Reserved for a future implementation phase; not yet implemented.
.TP
.BR \-h ", " \-\-help
Print help message.
.TP
.BR \-V ", " \-\-version
Print version.
.SH TUI NAVIGATION
.TP
.BR Tab " / " Shift\-Tab
Switch between the three audit tabs.
.TP
.BR j " / " k " or " \(ua " / " \(da
Scroll within the active tab.
.TP
.BR q " or " Esc
Quit.
.TP
.B ?
Show contextual help for the active tab.
.SH EXIT STATUS
.TP
.B 0
Success.
.TP
.B 1
File not found, read error, or terminal initialization failure.
.TP
.B 2
Usage error (bad arguments).
.SH SECURITY CONSIDERATIONS
.IP \(bu 2
All file reads are routed through
.B umrs-platform
provenance-checked readers.
This includes filesystem-magic verification (via
.B fstatfs
on an anchored file descriptor) and TOCTOU protection.
.IP \(bu 2
The tool does not modify any file attribute.
It is unconditionally read-only.
.IP \(bu 2
IMA/EVM status is read from the
.I security.ima
xattr and the
.I security.evm
xattr using
.B O_NOFOLLOW
to prevent symlink redirection attacks.
.IP \(bu 2
SELinux context is read from the
.I security.selinux
xattr on the resolved file descriptor.
If SELinux is disabled in the kernel, the Marking field shows
.IR N/A .
.SH COMPLIANCE
.TP
.B NIST SP 800-53 AU-3
Audit Record Content \(em the operator supplies the target path explicitly;
the tool is self-identifying via report name and subject in all output modes.
.TP
.B NIST SP 800-53 CM-6
Output mode is operator-controlled via
.BR \-\-json ;
no implicit configuration inference occurs.
.TP
.B NIST SP 800-53 SI-7
Software and Information Integrity \(em IMA/EVM status provides
kernel-measured integrity evidence for the inspected file.
.SH FILES
.TP
.I /usr/share/locale/fr_CA/LC_MESSAGES/umrs-stat.mo
French (Canada) message catalog.
.SH ENVIRONMENT
.TP
.B LANG
Controls the locale for message translation.
Set to
.B fr_CA.UTF-8
to receive French (Canada) output.
.TP
.B LC_ALL
Overrides all locale categories.
Supersedes
.BR LANG .
.TP
.B UMRS_LOCALEDIR
Override the locale directory (development testing only).
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR umrs-ls (1),
.BR umrs-label (1),
.BR stat (1),
.BR ls (1)
.SH AUTHORS
Jamie Adams (a.k.a. Imodium Operator)
.SH LICENSE
MIT License.
See LICENSE file.
