.\" SPDX-License-Identifier: MIT
.\" Copyright (c) 2025 Jamie Adams
.TH UMRS-C2PA 1 "2026-04-01" "umrs-c2pa 0.1.0" "UMRS Tools"
.SH NAME
umrs-c2pa \- C2PA media inspection and signing tool
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B umrs-c2pa
.RI [ OPTIONS ]
.I FILE
.br
.B umrs-c2pa
.RI [ OPTIONS ]
.B \-\-sign
.RI [ \-\-marking
.IR STRING ]
.RI [ \-\-output
.IR PATH ]
.I FILE
.br
.B umrs-c2pa
.RI [ OPTIONS ]
.RB [ \-\-json | \-\-chain\-json ]
.I FILE
.br
.B umrs-c2pa creds generate
.RI [ OPTIONS ]
.br
.B umrs-c2pa creds validate
.br
.B umrs-c2pa config validate
.br
.B umrs-c2pa config generate
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B umrs-c2pa
inspects media files for C2PA (Coalition for Content Provenance and
Authenticity) manifests and manages chain-of-custody signing for the
Unclassified MLS Reference System (UMRS).
.PP
When given a file with no subcommand, it reads the C2PA manifest store and
displays the chain of custody \(em who signed the file, when, with what
algorithm, and whether the signature is trusted.
.PP
With
.BR \-\-sign ,
it ingests the file into the UMRS chain of custody by signing it with a
new C2PA manifest containing action assertions, optional security markings,
and the signer\(cqs identity.
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.BI \-\-config " PATH"
Path to the UMRS configuration file.
Default:
.IR umrs-c2pa.toml .
.TP
.BR \-v ", " \-\-verbose
Show step-by-step progress messages on stderr.
Useful for understanding what the tool is doing and for troubleshooting.
Does not affect structured log output (journald).
.TP
.B \-\-sign
Sign (ingest) the file and record a UMRS chain-of-custody entry.
Without this flag, the file is inspected read-only.
.TP
.B \-\-json
Emit the full manifest store as JSON instead of the formatted report.
This is the raw output from the c2pa SDK.
.TP
.B \-\-chain\-json
Emit the UMRS-parsed evidence chain as JSON.
Returns structured data with trust status, signer, algorithm, generator,
and security label fields.
.TP
.BI \-\-marking " STRING"
Security marking to embed in the manifest (e.g., "CUI" or "CUI//SP-CTI//NOFORN").
Only applies when
.B \-\-sign
is used.
Stored as a tamper-evident
.I umrs.security-label
assertion.
.TP
.BI \-\-output " PATH"
Write the signed output to this path.
Default: appends
.I _umrs_signed
before the file extension.
.TP
.BR \-h ", " \-\-help
Print help message.
.TP
.BR \-V ", " \-\-version
Print version.
.SH SUBCOMMANDS
.SS creds generate
Generate a new signing certificate and private key.
.TP
.BI \-\-output " DIR"
Directory to write
.I signing.pem
and
.IR signing.key .
Default: current directory.
.TP
.B \-\-csr
Generate a Certificate Signing Request instead of a self-signed certificate.
Submit the CSR to your Certificate Authority for a production certificate.
.TP
.BI \-\-days " N"
Certificate validity in days.
Ignored with
.BR \-\-csr .
Default: 365.
.PP
After generating, set the paths in
.IR umrs-c2pa.toml :
.PP
.RS
.nf
[identity]
cert_chain  = "/path/to/signing.pem"
private_key = "/path/to/signing.key"
.fi
.RE
.SS creds validate
Validate the configured signing credentials.
Checks that cert and key files exist, are valid PEM, match each other,
and reports certificate details (subject, issuer, validity dates, algorithm).
.SS config validate
Run preflight checks on the configuration file.
Verifies required fields, certificate and key paths, algorithm safety,
TSA reachability, and trust list configuration.
.SS config generate
Generate a commented starter configuration file.
.TP
.BI \-\-output " PATH"
Write the generated config to this path.
If omitted, prints to stdout.
.SH ALGORITHMS
Only FIPS-safe algorithms are permitted:
.PP
.TS
l l l.
Algorithm	Type	Details
_
es256	ECDSA	P-256 / SHA-256 / 256-bit
es384	ECDSA	P-384 / SHA-384 / 384-bit
es512	ECDSA	P-521 / SHA-512 / 521-bit
ps256	RSA-PSS	SHA-256 / 2048+ bit
ps384	RSA-PSS	SHA-384 / 2048+ bit
ps512	RSA-PSS	SHA-512 / 2048+ bit
.TE
.PP
.B ed25519
is intentionally excluded \(em unreliable on FIPS-enabled RHEL systems.
.SH TRUST LISTS
Trust validation requires PEM-format trust anchor files configured in
.IR umrs-c2pa.toml .
Two separate trust lists are used:
.TP
.B C2PA-TRUST-LIST.pem
Signing CA roots \(em validates the certificate chain of whoever signed the manifest.
.TP
.B C2PA-TSA-TRUST-LIST.pem
Timestamp Authority CA roots \(em validates the certificate chain of the TSA
that timestamped the signature.
Verifying an existing TSA timestamp is a local operation; the
.B internet
feature is not required for this.
.PP
Download both lists from the C2PA consortium:
.PP
.RS
.nf
https://raw.githubusercontent.com/c2pa-org/conformance-public/\e
  refs/heads/main/trust-list/C2PA-TRUST-LIST.pem
https://raw.githubusercontent.com/c2pa-org/conformance-public/\e
  refs/heads/main/trust-list/C2PA-TSA-TRUST-LIST.pem
.fi
.RE
.PP
Configure paths in
.IR umrs-c2pa.toml :
.PP
.RS
.nf
[trust]
trust_anchors = "/path/to/C2PA-TRUST-LIST.pem"
user_anchors  = "/path/to/C2PA-TSA-TRUST-LIST.pem"
allowed_list  = "/path/to/allowed-signers.pem"
trust_config  = "/path/to/ekus.cfg"
verify_trust  = true
.fi
.RE
.PP
Without trust configuration, all manifests display NO TRUST LIST.
See
.I docs/trust-maintenance.md
for full update procedures including air-gapped environments.
.SH CONFIGURATION FILE
Default:
.IR umrs-c2pa.toml .
Sections:
.TP
.B [identity]
Claim generator name, organization, certificate/key paths, algorithm.
.TP
.B [timestamp]
Time Stamp Authority URL.
.TP
.B [policy]
Action labels and reason strings for signed and unsigned files.
.TP
.B [trust]
Trust anchor PEM paths, EKU configuration, OCSP responder.
.TP
.B [logging]
Enable/disable logging, minimum log level.
.SH QUICK START
.PP
.RS
.nf
# 1. Generate a config file
umrs-c2pa config generate --output umrs-c2pa.toml

# 2. Generate signing credentials
umrs-c2pa creds generate --output ./certs

# 3. Edit umrs-c2pa.toml \(em set cert_chain and private_key

# 4. Verify everything
umrs-c2pa config validate
umrs-c2pa creds validate

# 5. Inspect a file
umrs-c2pa photo.jpg

# 6. Sign a file
umrs-c2pa --sign photo.jpg

# 7. Sign with a security marking
umrs-c2pa --sign --marking CUI photo.jpg
.fi
.RE
.SH EXIT STATUS
.TP
.B 0
Success.
.TP
.B 1
File or manifest error, or validation failure.
.TP
.B 2
Usage error (bad arguments).
.SH FILES
.TP
.I umrs-c2pa.toml
Default configuration file (searched in current directory).
.TP
.I signing.pem
Certificate chain (PEM, leaf first).
.TP
.I signing.key
Private key (PEM, PKCS#8).
Mode 0600 recommended.
.SH ENVIRONMENT
.TP
.B C2PA_FIXTURES_DIR
Override path to c2pa-rs test fixtures (for integration tests only).
.SH SECURITY CONSIDERATIONS
.IP \(bu 2
Private keys are written with mode 0600 on Unix systems, atomically at file
creation time \(em not as a post-write chmod \(em eliminating the race window.
The tool refuses to overwrite existing key files.
.IP \(bu 2
Private key bytes are held in a zeroizing buffer and zeroed on drop to prevent
key recovery from freed heap memory
(NIST SP 800-53 SC-12).
.IP \(bu 2
On Unix, private key files are opened with
.B O_NOFOLLOW
to refuse symlink targets, preventing symlink-based key substitution attacks
(NIST SP 800-53 AC-3).
.IP \(bu 2
.B config validate
checks private key file permissions and warns if they are broader than 0600 or 0400.
.IP \(bu 2
Only FIPS 140-2/140-3 safe algorithms are permitted.
ed25519 is excluded by policy \(em unreliable on FIPS-enabled RHEL OpenSSL providers.
(NIST SP 800-53 SC-13, FIPS 186-5).
.IP \(bu 2
Security markings (e.g., CUI) are embedded as cryptographically signed
assertions.
Tampering with the marking invalidates the manifest signature.
.IP \(bu 2
Ephemeral (test mode) certificates are clearly labeled in the CN field
and produce UNVERIFIED trust status.
.IP \(bu 2
If journald is unavailable at startup, the tool falls back to stderr logging
rather than aborting, ensuring audit output is never silently lost
(NIST SP 800-53 AU-5).
.SH DIGEST VERIFICATION
Every file inspected or signed by
.B umrs-c2pa
produces two independent digests: SHA-256 for current FIPS 140-2/140-3 and
C2PA compatibility, and SHA-384 for CNSA 2.0 (Commercial National Security
Algorithm Suite 2.0) readiness.
CNSA 2.0 requires SHA-384 as the minimum hash strength for classified
national security systems.
Both digests are computed using system OpenSSL for FIPS compliance.
.PP
To verify either digest independently:
.PP
.RS
.nf
openssl dgst \-sha256 file.jpg
openssl dgst \-sha384 file.jpg
.fi
.RE
.PP
The values must match what
.B umrs-c2pa
reports.
A mismatch indicates the file has been modified since inspection.
.SH STANDARDS
.TP
.B C2PA
Coalition for Content Provenance and Authenticity Technical Specification
.RI ( https://c2pa.org )
.TP
.B FIPS 186-5
Digital Signature Standard (ECDSA, RSA-PSS)
.TP
.B CNSA 2.0
NSA Commercial National Security Algorithm Suite 2.0
.TP
.B NIST SP 800-53 AU-3
Audit Record Content
.SH AUTHORS
Jamie Adams (a.k.a, Imodium Operator)
.SH LICENSE
MIT License.
See LICENSE file.
.PP
This tool depends on the c2pa crate by Adobe (MIT OR Apache-2.0).
See THIRD-PARTY-NOTICES.md.
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR openssl (1),
.BR c2patool (1)
