.\" SPDX-License-Identifier: MIT
.\" Copyright (c) 2025 Jamie Adams
.TH UMRS-UNAME 1 "2026-04-15" "umrs-uname 0.1.0" "UMRS Tools"
.SH NAME
umrs-uname \- OS detection audit card with kernel security posture and trust evidence
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B umrs-uname
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B umrs-uname
runs the
.B umrs-platform
OS detection pipeline and displays the result as a three-tab interactive
audit card in the terminal.
.PP
The card displays:
.PP
.IP "OS Information tab" 20
OS release fields from
.IR /etc/os-release ,
platform identity, distribution, kernel version, architecture, and boot ID.
.IP "Kernel Security tab" 20
Live kernel security posture indicators collected from
.BR /proc/ " and " /sys/
nodes at startup: boot integrity state, FIPS cryptographic mode, lockdown
mode, module loading, and kernel hardening assessment from the posture catalog.
.IP "Trust / Evidence tab" 20
Label trust classification (T0\(emT4), confidence tier, downgrade reasons,
detected contradictions between configured and live kernel values, and the
full ordered evidence chain with per-record source kind and verification status.
Always the rightmost tab.
.PP
All attributes are read via the
.B umrs-platform
provenance-verified abstraction layer.
No direct
.BR stat (2)
or
.BR open (2)
calls on security-relevant paths occur outside of vetted library code.
.PP
.B umrs-uname
takes no arguments.
The tool runs, detects, and presents results immediately.
.SH TUI NAVIGATION
.TP
.BR Tab " / " \(ra
Advance to the next tab.
.TP
.BR Shift\-Tab " / " \(la
Return to the previous tab.
.TP
.BR j " / " k " or " \(ua " / " \(da
Scroll within the active tab.
.TP
.BR q " or " Esc
Quit.
.TP
.B ?
Show the keyboard help overlay for the active tab.
.SH EXIT STATUS
.TP
.B 0
Success.
.TP
.B 1
OS detection hard-gate failure or terminal initialization failure.
.SH SECURITY CONSIDERATIONS
.IP \(bu 2
All system reads are routed through
.B umrs-platform
provenance-checked readers.
This includes filesystem-magic verification (via
.B fstatfs
on an anchored file descriptor) and TOCTOU protection.
.IP \(bu 2
The OS Information tab reads
.I /etc/os-release
via the
.B OsDetector
pipeline, which includes ownership verification and package database cross-checks.
Detection fails closed if any trust gate is not satisfied.
.IP \(bu 2
The Kernel Security tab reads posture indicators from
.BR /proc/ " and " /sys/
nodes using the
.B PostureSnapshot
engine.
Each indicator is compared against the UMRS kernel catalog baseline and
contradictions are surfaced on the Trust / Evidence tab.
.IP \(bu 2
The Trust / Evidence tab displays the
.B TrustLevel
assigned by the detection pipeline (T0\(emT4).
T4 (Integrity Anchored) requires
.I os-release
ownership verification plus installed package digest confirmation.
.IP \(bu 2
The tool does not modify any system state.
It is unconditionally read-only.
.IP \(bu 2
When
.B NO_COLOR
is set, the tool renders in monochrome mode, maintaining all information
content without ANSI color codes (WCAG 1.4.1).
.SH TRUST LEVELS
.TP
.B T0 — Untrusted
No kernel anchor established.
.TP
.B T1 — Kernel Anchored
.BR /proc
filesystem verified via PROC_SUPER_MAGIC and PID coherence.
.TP
.B T2 — Environment Anchored
Mount topology cross-checked (mountinfo vs statfs).
.TP
.B T3 — Platform Verified
Platform identity confirmed; two or more independent package facts corroborated.
.TP
.B T4 — Integrity Anchored
.IR os-release
ownership plus installed digest verified.
Highest trust level available.
.SH COMPLIANCE
.TP
.B NIST SP 800-53 CM-8
Component Inventory \(em platform identity, kernel version, distribution,
and architecture are collected and displayed for inventory records.
.TP
.B NIST SP 800-53 CA-7
Continuous Monitoring \(em kernel security posture indicators are collected
at startup and compared against the UMRS catalog baseline.
.TP
.B NIST SP 800-53 SI-7
Software and Information Integrity \(em label trust classification (T0\(emT4)
and the evidence chain provide kernel-anchored integrity evidence.
.TP
.B NIST SP 800-53 AU-3
Audit Record Content \(em the Trust / Evidence tab displays the full
evidence chain with source kind, verification status, and contradiction
records in a format suitable for audit review.
.SH ENVIRONMENT
.TP
.B NO_COLOR
When set (any value), color output is disabled unconditionally.
.TP
.B LANG
Controls the locale for translated output.
Set to
.B fr_CA.UTF-8
for French (Canada).
.TP
.B LC_ALL
Overrides all locale categories.
Supersedes
.BR LANG .
.TP
.B UMRS_LOCALEDIR
Override locale directory (development testing only).
.SH FILES
.TP
.I /etc/os-release
Primary OS identification source.
Read via the
.B OsDetector
pipeline with provenance verification.
.TP
.I /usr/share/locale/fr_CA/LC_MESSAGES/umrs-uname.mo
French (Canada) message catalog.
.SH AUTHORS
Jamie Adams (a.k.a. Imodium Operator)
.SH LICENSE
MIT License.
See LICENSE file.
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR uname (1),
.BR umrs-stat (1),
.BR umrs-ls (1),
.BR os-release (5)
