.\" SPDX-License-Identifier: MIT
.\" Copyright (c) 2025 Jamie Adams
.TH UMRS-LS 1 "2026-04-15" "umrs-ls 0.1.0" "UMRS Tools"
.SH NAME
umrs-ls \- security-focused directory listing with SELinux context and CUI markings
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B umrs-ls
.RI [ PATH ]
.RB [ \-\-color ]
.RB [ \-\-no\-iov ]
.RB [ \-\-no\-mtime ]
.RB [ \-\-with\-size ]
.RB [ \-\-with\-inode ]
.RB [ \-\-flat ]
.RB [ \-\-cli ]
.RB [ \-\-json ]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B umrs-ls
displays directory entries enriched with SELinux security context,
CUI security marking, POSIX ownership, and security observations.
.PP
Output is grouped by
.I (SELinux type, security marking)
pair.
The type and marking appear in group headers and are not repeated for
every row.
.PP
By default, related files (log rotations, signatures, checksums, backups)
are
.I cuddled
under their base file \(em one summary line replaces the individual sibling
rows.
Pass
.B \-\-flat
to disable cuddling and show every entry on its own row.
.PP
When stdout is a terminal, the interactive TUI directory browser launches
automatically.
Use
.B \-\-cli
to force columnar text output.
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.RI [ PATH ]
Directory to list.
Default: current directory
.RB ( . ).
.TP
.B \-\-color
Enable ANSI color output.
Has no effect if the
.B NO_COLOR
environment variable is set.
.TP
.B \-\-no\-iov
Omit the security observations column (IOV = Integrity Observation Vector).
.TP
.B \-\-no\-mtime
Omit the last-modified time column.
.TP
.B \-\-with\-size
Include a file-size column (hidden by default).
.TP
.B \-\-with\-inode
Include an inode number column (hidden by default).
.TP
.B \-\-flat
Disable cuddling; show every entry on its own row.
.TP
.B \-\-cli
Force plain-text columnar output instead of the interactive TUI.
Implied when stdout is not a terminal.
.TP
.B \-\-json
Emit machine-readable JSON output.
Always bypasses the TUI.
.TP
.BR \-h ", " \-\-help
Print help.
Not implemented with clap; use
.B \-\-version
to verify the binary.
.SH OUTPUT FORMAT
.SS CLI mode
Entries are printed in groups separated by a header line showing the
SELinux type and CUI marking for that group.
Each row displays MODE, OWNER:GROUP, MODIFIED, NAME,
and security observations.
The SIZE and inode columns are hidden unless requested with
.B \-\-with\-size
and
.BR \-\-with\-inode .
.SS TUI mode
An interactive two-panel browser.
Left panel shows the directory tree; right panel shows the SELinux label
and CUI marking detail popup for the selected entry.
Press
.BR Enter
on a file to open the security detail popup.
.SS JSON mode
Outputs a JSON document containing grouped directory entries.
Each group carries the SELinux type, marking, and an array of entries
with full metadata.
.SH TUI NAVIGATION
.TP
.BR j " / " k " or " \(ua " / " \(da
Move up or down in the directory listing.
.TP
.BR Enter
Open the security detail popup for the selected entry.
.TP
.BR Tab " / " Shift\-Tab
Switch focus between panels.
.TP
.BR /
Search within the listing.
.TP
.BR q " or " Esc
Quit or close popup.
.SH EXIT STATUS
.TP
.B 0
Success.
.TP
.B 1
Directory read error or terminal initialization failure.
.TP
.B 2
Usage error.
.SH SECURITY CONSIDERATIONS
.IP \(bu 2
All directory reads are fd-anchored via
.B SecureDirent
with filesystem-magic verification (PROC_SUPER_MAGIC for
.I /proc
entries).
This eliminates TOCTOU vulnerabilities in directory traversal
(NSA RTB RAIN).
.IP \(bu 2
SELinux security contexts are read from the
.I security.selinux
xattr on each entry's anchored file descriptor.
If SELinux is disabled in the kernel, the MARKING column shows
.IR N/A .
.IP \(bu 2
Color output is suppressed when
.B NO_COLOR
is set, regardless of the
.B \-\-color
flag.
This prevents ANSI escape sequences from reaching downstream programs.
.IP \(bu 2
Access-denied entries are counted and reported as a group footer
rather than silently omitted.
.SH COMPLIANCE
.TP
.B NIST SP 800-53 AC-3
Access Enforcement \(em every entry displays the SELinux label
used in access decisions.
.TP
.B NIST SP 800-53 AC-4
Information Flow Enforcement \(em MCS markings and security observations
surface information-flow boundary violations.
.TP
.B NIST SP 800-53 AU-3
Audit Record Content \(em all identity, label, and observation fields
required for audit are included in the output.
.TP
.B NSA RTB RAIN
Non-Bypassability and TOCTOU safety \(em all directory reads are
fd-anchored via
.BR SecureDirent .
.SH ENVIRONMENT
.TP
.B NO_COLOR
When set (any value), color output is disabled unconditionally.
.TP
.B LANG
Controls the locale for translated output.
Set to
.B fr_CA.UTF-8
for French (Canada).
.TP
.B LC_ALL
Overrides all locale categories.
Supersedes
.BR LANG .
.TP
.B UMRS_LOCALEDIR
Override locale directory (development testing only).
.SH FILES
.TP
.I /usr/share/locale/fr_CA/LC_MESSAGES/umrs-ls.mo
French (Canada) message catalog.
.SH AUTHORS
Jamie Adams (a.k.a. Imodium Operator)
.SH LICENSE
MIT License.
See LICENSE file.
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR ls (1),
.BR umrs-stat (1),
.BR umrs-label (1),
.BR stat (1)
