.\" SPDX-License-Identifier: MIT
.\" Copyright (c) 2025 Jamie Adams
.TH UMRS-LABEL 1 "2026-04-15" "umrs-label 0.1.0" "UMRS Tools"
.SH NAME
umrs-label \- browse and display the UMRS security label registry
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B umrs-label
.RB [ \-\-us\-catalog
.IR PATH ]
.RB [ \-\-ca\-catalog
.IR PATH ]
.RB [ \-\-cli ]
.RB [ \-\-json ]
.br
.B umrs-label
.BR \-\-help
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B umrs-label
loads CUI (Controlled Unclassified Information) and Canadian Protected label
catalogs from JSON files and renders them as an interactive browser.
.PP
When stdout is a terminal, the interactive TUI launches automatically.
Use
.B \-\-cli
to force plain-text output, or pipe the output to another program.
.PP
The tool is unconditionally read-only.
No catalog mutation is possible through the interface.
.PP
The TUI presents a two-panel layout: a label tree on the left organized by
index group, and a detail panel on the right showing the full marking
definition, designation (Basic or Specified), handling instructions,
and mandatory warning statements for the selected entry.
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.BI \-\-us\-catalog " PATH"
Path to the US CUI label catalog JSON file.
Default:
.IR config/us/US-CUI-LABELS.json .
.TP
.BI \-\-ca\-catalog " PATH"
Path to the Canadian Protected label catalog JSON file.
Default:
.IR config/ca/CANADIAN-PROTECTED.json .
The Canadian catalog is optional; if the file is absent the tool continues
with US CUI labels only.
.TP
.B \-\-cli
Force plain-text CLI output instead of the interactive TUI.
Implied when stdout is not a terminal.
.TP
.B \-\-json
Emit machine-readable JSON output.
Reserved for a future implementation phase; not yet implemented.
.TP
.BR \-h ", " \-\-help
Print help message.
.TP
.BR \-V ", " \-\-version
Print version.
.SH TUI NAVIGATION
.TP
.BR j " / " k " or " \(ua " / " \(da
Move up or down in the active panel.
.TP
.BR h " / " l " or " \(la " / " \(ra
Collapse or expand the selected node.
.TP
.BR Tab
Switch focus between the tree panel and the detail panel.
.TP
.BR Enter " or " Space
Show details / toggle branch expansion.
.TP
.BR /
Search and filter the catalog tree.
.TP
.BR Esc
Cancel search.
.TP
.BR ?
Toggle the keyboard help overlay.
.TP
.BR q
Quit.
.SH CATALOG FILE FORMAT
Catalogs are JSON files.
The top-level key is
.BR "markings" .
Each entry key is the full banner marking string (e.g.,
.IR "CUI//SP-CTI" ).
Fields include
.IR name ,
.IR abbrv_name ,
.IR index_group ,
.IR designation ,
.IR level ,
.IR required_warning_statement ,
and
.IR required_dissemination_control .
.PP
See
.I docs/FIELD-REFERENCE.md
in the
.B umrs-label
source tree for the full field specification.
.SH EXIT STATUS
.TP
.B 0
Success.
.TP
.B 1
Terminal initialization failure or runtime error.
.TP
.B 2
Usage error or required catalog file could not be loaded.
.SH SECURITY CONSIDERATIONS
.IP \(bu 2
Catalog JSON files are loaded read-only.
No write path exists in this tool.
.IP \(bu 2
CUI palette colors never use red or orange, which are reserved for
SECRET and TOP SECRET on classified systems.
.IP \(bu 2
CUI Basic is a handling standard, not an access level.
Displaying all Basic categories in the browser does not imply
authorization to access data in any category.
.SH COMPLIANCE
.TP
.B NIST SP 800-53 AC-16
Security Attributes \(em accurate display of all CUI marking fields,
including designation, handling instructions, and mandatory warning statements.
.TP
.B NIST SP 800-53 AC-3
The browser is unconditionally read-only; no catalog mutation is possible.
.TP
.B NIST SP 800-53 AU-3
The TUI header carries hostname, OS, SELinux mode, and FIPS state
on every rendered frame.
.TP
.B NIST SP 800-53 SI-10
Input Validation \(em clap validates all CLI arguments at entry,
rejecting unknown flags before any catalog I/O occurs.
.SH FILES
.TP
.I config/us/US-CUI-LABELS.json
Default US CUI label catalog (relative to working directory).
.TP
.I config/ca/CANADIAN-PROTECTED.json
Default Canadian Protected label catalog (relative to working directory,
optional).
.SH STANDARDS
.TP
.B NARA CUI Registry
National Archives and Records Administration Controlled Unclassified
Information Registry
.RI ( https://www.archives.gov/cui )
.TP
.B Treasury Board of Canada
Policy on Government Security \(em Canadian Protected label definitions
.SH AUTHORS
Jamie Adams (a.k.a. Imodium Operator)
.SH LICENSE
MIT License.
See LICENSE file.
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR umrs-stat (1),
.BR umrs-ls (1)
